---
layout: post
title: Will Programming disappear?
key: 20250710
tags: [llm, ai, programming, politics] 
---

In a predictably dystopian fashion, hopelessness is sighed as a response to what appears as an affront to one's
stability in life -- employment. A revolution breathes down the neck as the majority of labor depreciates, drawing
parallels to how the cottage industry became obsolete with the advent of steam-powered machinery. I inexorably ponder:
how much of futuristic speculation bears weight on the already burdened predicament of capitalist imperialism?

First, we concern ourselves with automation stemming from two branches of active research: robotics and artificial
intelligence. Each branch conventionally maps to physical and mental aspects of labor. For the sake of argument, given
that socially valuable human output is reduced to these faculties, the societal problem may hence be formulated: a
practical substitution of a human with a machine, made possible through advances in human ingenuity, leads to the
rhetorical question: what is there left to do?

As much fun as it is to poke holes in this argument (will everyone just passively lie down and die, even when they have
nothing left to lose?), a lighter rendition of it is the claim that programming will become obsolete.

This is more of a taxonomical inquiry, because programming, regardless of its rampant metamorphosis throughout its
numerable decades, is left for language users to decide whether it is an appropriate time to shelf the term in a museum
and name the new manifestation a new word entirely. Those keen on the notion that there might exist the _final software_
are barking up the wrong tree, for the fuse for the programmer's market to shrink has been lit long before GPT-style
large language models instilled fear into people's hearts.

Programming exists because humans are inherently illogical and morally inconsistent, and it takes considerable effort to
uphold the eagerly proclaimed promises. Outcomes don't manifest through the sheer power of will -- one needs to think
through not just the concrete steps needed to achieve the desired result, but also to conceptualize and anticipate the
outcome itself, including the externalities that a complex action might entail. The fact alone that desires stem from
people themselves would mean that making a machine autonomous isn't enough; one must simulate a portion of a universe
with the customer base existing in order to fulfill dreams beyond electric sheep. But if you wish to spare an expensive
electricity bill and instead measure neural activity of a person -- congratulations -- you have invented a user
interface.

Now, will someone currently occupying a position in upper management wish to constantly conjure dreams of perfect
software? If you think the answer is yes, then take me to your home planet, my alien friend. The higher you go on the
career ladder, the less you care about the grunt work itself, and the main question becomes how to turn a large pile of
money into a larger pile of money. Most answers to this question do not involve a single line of code.

A more realistic reason for programming to experience a crisis is the lack of specialized expertise in the
business/domain itself, because the predisposition with suboptimal Landau complexity will not explain how laws of
physics work. When compute and memory is in abundance, not just the boss but also not a single person in the world will
care how many heap allocations your program makes. But, if your CNC machine destroys parts, your heart pacemaker kills
people, or your autopilot system crashes planes â€” this is the moment when the industry cries about a shortage of skilled
people. The bitter lesson for seekers of "pure programming" is that work is not academia. For that reason, I strongly
believe that the care-free days for the likes of "web development" are numbered.